Add documentation on using & creating plugins. (#2452)
tuist/tuist: website/markdown/docs/plugins/using-plugins.mdx

---
name: Using plugins
excerpt: Learn how to extend Tuist with plugins.
---

# Using Plugins

## Plugins

> With plugins you can extend Tuist to add support for custom project description helpers, custom templates, and much more!

Reviewer: Right now only project description helpers are supported, right?

Author: Yes, only helpers right now. Will remove this line here!

> Plugins are meant to be separate isolated directories that contain custom code or templates used to extend existing Tuist functionality. 
> You may use plugins that exist locally on your machine or better yet, upload them to the internet and keep them under source control.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Plugins are meant to be separate and isolated directories, each containing custom code or templates used to extend existing Tuist functionality. 
You may use plugins that exist at a path local to your machine or at a git source URL to enable sharing and version control across multiple projects.
```

It could also be in source control local your project, not necessarily an either/or, so might be better to just document local vs git. That would give a bit more space to talk about tag vs sha and be explicit about what the options are.

Also unclear: are these paths relative to the project? Absolute?

## Adding plugins

In order to tell Tuist you'd like to use plugins in your project, you can start by defining the plugins in the [`Config.swift`](/docs/usage/config/) manifest.

```swift
import ProjectDescription

let config = Config(
    plugins: [
        .local(path: "/Plugins/MyPlugin"),
        .git(url: "https://url/to/plugin.git", tag: "1.0.0"),
        .git(url: "https://url/to/plugin.git", sha: "e34c5ba")
    ]
)
```

By defining plugins in the [`Config.swift`](/docs/usage/config/) manifest Tuist is able to collect, cache and use your plugins to add or extend functionality.

### Local plugin

Local plugins are stored relative to the machine generating the project. You can tell Tuist to find them at a given [`Path`](/docs/usage/project-description/). 

```swift
PluginLocation.local(path: "/Plugins/MyPlugin")
PluginLocation.local(path: .relativeToCurrentFile("MyOtherPlugin/"))
PluginLocation.local(path: .relativeToManifest("../DevelopmentPlugin"))
```

### Remote plugin

Remote plugins are stored on a remote server and can be downloaded by Tuist and shared across multiple projects.

> #### git

Reviewer 3: I have the feeling that the git part assumes that the Plugin.swift file is in the root of the repository (I haven't checked the implementation to confirm this assumption).

If this is the case, maybe it is worth specifying it. It may be obvious, but one can think of having a repo of multiple plugins, each on a sub folder of the repo (and I guess this use case is not supported). I'd do it also because a plugin is defined as "a folder with a plugin.swift file", without mentioning any additional requirement

Author: You're correct it must be at the root in the current implementation, adding this!
